---
layout: post
title: Embrace the Ideas of March!
---
Any programming language is only as good as the community leaders
that back it up. For every opinionated douchebag (I've been called
that) that is being promoted as a "thought leader" there are, what,
1000 people hanging off their every word? I've been involved in the
PHP community for a long time, and despite my occasional thoughts
that I am a D-level celebrity in the PHP ecosystem, I realize that
as someone who has some sort of name recognition that it's
important to continue to share my thoughts about PHP.

The recent move by Twitter to wrest control of how tweets are
presented by basically telling people "don't make any new clients
and we'll shut down any clients that don't show the ads we are
planning on introducing" reminded me of just how much I make use of
blogs to help me solve problems. I'm sure I've spent man-years
rummaging through results from search engines trying to find
insights into how to solve a particular problem. While I don't
spend a lot of time analyzing the access logs for my own blog, I am
continually amazed at how often older blog posts of mine are read.
Although I might not use the framework or technology addressed in
that blog post any more, I'm happy that others are gaining value
from my experiences.

Chris Shiflett has kick-started a trend to
[blog your longer thoughts rather than spread them out via Twitter](http://shiflett.org/blog/2011/mar/ideas-of-march)
and I happen to agree with him 100%. Twitter's recent decision to
grab control of the presentation of messages sent using their
service reminded me that blog posts are still my preferred way of
getting across my thoughts on technical issues. If I didn't care so
much about my blog, I wouldn't have put all the effort I did into
converting it into a static blog from WordPress. As a result of
this, I'm throwing my hat into the Ideas of March concept. My
pledge is to blog something every other day until the end of this
month. It might be short. It might be a long rant if I have the
energy once the kids are safely tucked into bed. But it will always
be entertaining. My first discussion is a very personal one.

My relationship with the PHP community waxes and wanes, depending
on my commitment to learning other things. I look at someone like
[Travis Swicegood](http://www.travisswicegood.com/) who has shown
me the path on how to keep multiple feet planted in various
communities. Travis is an old PHP guy, but now slings Python in the
day job for [The Texas Tribune](http://www.texastribune.org/). He
also wrote what a lot of people consider to be the most practical
guide to
[using Git](http://www.pragprog.com/titles/tsgit/pragmatic-version-control-using-git).
I was honoured that Travis asked me to be an early reviewer of the
book, but it shows that you can be a
[polymath](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymath) in more than one
community.

Travis' success (I know you will read this Travis, don't be modest
about what you've done) has gotten me to start considering my own
path. I joke that my career path is pushing me towards "Jack of all
trades, speaker of none" (owing to my current streak of not being
accepted to speaking at the major PHP conferences) but it is a path
that a lot of people need to consider. Being a well-rounded
developer is great for whomever is signing my paycheques, it's not
so great if you are constantly seeking attention for your
accomplishments. Despite what some people might think, ego
gratification is not the things that drives me. It's the quest to
learn more things. The quest to expand the skills so that when
someone asks you to do something you can say "I know exactly how to
do that" and also knowing "I don't know how to do that, but I know
where I can find out."

Once you expand the horizons, blogs become all that more important.
Where else can I found out what BDD tools are available in Python?
How are people doing deployment these days in Ruby? What tools
exist for converting a document written in Docbook into ePub and
Mobi? If I only stay within the Garden of the Elephpant I miss out
on so many other things. I want to write a non-trivial Django
application. I want to find a problem for which concurrency is the
solution. I want to learn how to read white papers on things like
Dynamo and figure out how to implement those ideas in a programming
language. I joke with my wife that I'll never retire because there
is just too much to learn, too much to know, and that furnace that
burns in my belly to accumulate knowledge never stops needing to be
stuffed full of fuel.

So I wish to raise a virtual toast to the polymaths and that
budding polymaths like me. It is because of people like them I am
able to fill my mind with all sorts of interesting information and
encourage me to look outside the warm, comfy confines of the
programming community I have been a part of since 1998. Don't be
just a PHP developer. Become a DEVELOPER.


