---
layout: post
title: Runied by pr0n
date: 2011-03-23
author: Chris Hartjes
---
(WARNING: POST CONTAINS PROFANITY AND CHRIS' OPINION ON EVENTS AT
AN OLD JOB. THEY MIGHT NOT MATCH THE REALITY BUT IT'S WHAT I
REMEMBER. YOU HAVE BEEN WARNED)

While it's not a secret to most people who have actually met me or
spoken with me at length, I worked for an
[adult dating web site](http://sexsearch.com) from January 2002
until December 2005. I committed the first line of code into the
CVS repository (yes, it was that long ago) and pulled some
ridiculously long hours along with the rest of team (which started
with just me and another developer and grew to be 20 by the time I
left) to push a first horrible version of it out. It was slow. It
was poorly architected. Built in the days before the Rise of The
Framework, it was big fucking mess. But it made the owners money
when it launched and the focus quickly became "don't do anything
that prevents sign-ups". It bugged me then. It bugs me now.

It was working in that unique environment that I cultivated the
grumpy, profanity-laden personality that has in recent years been
toned down. I was determined to Make Things Better, Damnit. There
were arguments about what bugs we should tackle first. I did a
little research project to see if we could refactor stuff into
using the Mojavi Project (which lives on in
[Agavi](http://www.agavi.org/)). It worked, but further work was
rejected. I constantly suggested new technologies that would be of
real benefit to us, focusing on caching and separating out business
logic from presentation logic so it would be easier to make "white
label" versions of the site (meaning we could resell the engine to
other people if they made their own templates). REJECTED.

I made a flash designer cry because I told him this
template-creation tool he had created was a toy and could never be
used by us internally. I had a superslacker, pot-smoking graphic
artist convinced I had got him fired because I warned him just
before he got fired that smoking pot during work hours was making
us all look bad. I didn't know he was going to be fired, but it
didn't take a genius to see the link.

I learned to not take shit from co-workers and also that the people
who own the company usually don't care about anything on the
technical level. They care about making money, and it was
surprising to me that I could not make the case to them that "well,
if we did things this way then the site is faster and you can sign
up more people." Chalk that up to experience. Now I try to make the
case by presenting it as being about costs and on-going
maintenance.

I left that job when it became obvious I was never going to advance
past being a code monkey. I had seen a proposal for a reassignment
of people into new teams and new jobs. The new job that had my name
to it would've been awesome. I was stoked. It was just the type of
stuff I wanted to do. When they reassignment happened, that job
disappeared and I was shoved even further down the org chart. All
because I was an asshole who wanted to make things at the code
level better.

My friend Kevin went through similar experiences but with a
different company in the same building. With those shared
experiences, we have a shorthand label we apply to ourselves
whenever we (well, it's usually me) complain about something that
happened at work. "Ruined By Porn", or \#rbp on Twitter.

Ruined By Porn means that we worked in an environment where the
attitude was really "tough shit, you're doing things our way. If
you don't like it you can sit there or you can quit". It means you
have gone through the experience of your managers and other
superiors trying to break you like you break an animal that is
trying to remain wild. I wish I could say I was joking, but it felt
that way. Psychological warfare in the workplace. Meetings where
your every suggestion was dismissed, but they wouldn't get rid of
you. It gives you a very low threshold for nonsense from your
co-workers as you learn to correctly identify threats and obstacles
that prevent you from doing the things you want to do.

I also learned all about inflexible schedules and learned that
crying about it never got it changed. I worked a ton of overtime
and bought my wife a really nice tennis bracelet with diamonds in
it as a way of saying "sorry I wasn't around for two months leading
up to Christmas, sticking you with our extremely young daughter."
It taught me that a poorly scoped and poorly managed project is
doomed to failure. No amount of applying agile or XP to it is going
to fix a late project. It matters when you try and do the next
project what you choose to use.

So what happened to me there? I learned the hardest lesson I had to
learn. When you push to make things better, unless you have real
power in the organization to make things happen you are screwed and
need to go and work somewhere else. I left that job because I got
tired of losing the political battle there. I was being shunted off
onto crummy jobs because of my personality and I thought that
nobody gave a damn what I was doing there, and the only reason I
didn't get fired or laid off was because they didn't want to pay me
severance. You have to be willing to walk away from a job if it's
not what you want. You have to be willing to walk away from a job
if it is never going to turn into what you wanted.

So at each job, I made sure I had more and more power to do the
stuff that I wanted. It has led me to be in positions where I have
a real impact on both the applications I help write and the
business itself. It has taught me that you need to frame
conversations about serious change in the way work is done and
things are built in terms of money saved. The only way you get to
do the things you want is to either have yourself as a boss or
frame the conversation in a way that the people who pay your salary
can understand.

So here's another lesson to learn as part of the Ideas of March: be
prepared to suffer if you wish to promote best-standards until you
have enough experience to back those views up with actions. Be
ready to quit for your principles. My wife says that my approach
has made me "semi-successful", and I think I agree with that.
