---
layout: post
title: PHP Community Conference 2011 -- Real People Building Real Things
---
I had the awesome opportunity to (assist with and) attend the 2011
[PHP Community Conference](http://www.phpcon.org) in Nashville on
April 21-22, 2011. I had been hoping to speak, but when I started
with with Ben Ramsey at Moontoast, it became a lot easier to attend
the conference while spending a few days meeting and working with
my new colleagues. Being a good co-worker, I manned the
registration table along with
[Jefferson McCree Jones](http://twitter.com/jmccree) and helped out
as much as I could. Lucky for me I was on the same level as the
tops being given "upstairs" and got to see a wide variety of
outstanding talks. Add in the awesome post-talk activities and the
great conversations I had with old friends and new ones, I cannot
imagine a better time at a technical conference. I even had the fun
experience of getting an apology for past behaviour from someone I
would never have expected.

The theme of this conference seemed to be "share with us something
you did", which is a great concept. I think you could also have
called it "Real people building real things". Part of the reason
you want to talk to people when you're at a conference is to find
out what sort of stuff they have been working on. As cool as some
technical talks are, they get boosted to another level if there is
tangible evidence to back up what they are talking about. I just
kept shaking my head at the "war stories" told to me about crazy
situations. I don't think I will ever forget
[Brian Moon](http://twitter.com/brianlmoon) tell me about the time
one of their humongous DB servers went down due to a faulty
controller card, and keeping the site up by sending content to
people via IM. Check out Brian's
[thoughts on PHP frameworks](http://brian.moonspot.net/php-frameworks).

I go to conferences to LEARN THINGS. Sure, it's awesome to meet new
people and keep renewing older friendships (my career management
skills always take leaps and bounds every time I talk to
[Paul Jones](http://paul-m-jones.com/) but I feel like the day I
stop learning stuff is the day I should get out of programming and
consider a career change. Every talk, from Rasmus' keynote advising
us to pay attention to the performance of our applications to Terry
Chay's closing talk about how frameworks are becoming so
commoditized that deployment environments like
[Orchestra](http://orchestra.io) are optimizing things to make
deploying applications built with specific frameworks.

The PHP environment is such a weird one compared to other languages
out there. Made for the web, optimized for rapid development, it is
really like no other. The only parallel I see today is Javascript.
Projects like Node.js are trying to make Javascript more viable
outside of the cozy sandbox of the browser, but running PHP on the
server outside the cozy sandbox of the web server usually isn't a
good idea. Where is the ecosystem of performance-related tools like
APC, [XHProf](https://github.com/facebook/xhprof) and Memcached in
the Ruby and Python worlds? Maybe I'm running in different circles,
but I haven't see blog posts of people using tools to profile their
Rails apps to look for bottlenecks and poorly-performing code. I'd
be interested in seeing some of them, especially for Python and
Django apps as I get further and further into my Django
experiences.

Hate PHP all you want for it's ease of use (which irritates those
developers who want to be snobs) and internal function parameter
inconsistencies, but what cannot be denied is the focus of those
developers towards the top of the community on performance-related
issues. These days I think it is less and less possible to promote
the idea that developer happiness counts for more than application
performance, and I think that despite all the hate out there for
it, PHP still is at the head of the pack in terms of how easy it is
to create high-performance applications using lightweight
frameworks and libraries. This is the concept that I kept hearing
throughout the conference. Pay attention to the size of your code!
Profile your application to find out where things are really slow!
Consider all the tools in other languages available to you!

The web is where PHP started, and the web is where it will stay. I
used to feel guilty when I started fooling around with Rails and
more recently Python. Those tools have their place too, with
awesome communities surrounding them. Again, it seems the focus for
PHP is to add in tools that help you create the leanest, tightest,
fastest web applications that you can. Sure, Facebook has created
HipHop to turn PHP into C++ executables because they are facing
issues that boggle the mind. Sure, frustrated programmers who had a
hard time navigating the spaghetti tendencies of PHP and Java found
Rails more to their liking, soothing their desire for hiding
complexity behind the DSL of a great framework. Sure, I find
calmness and zen in the whitespace-driven simplicity of Python and
the ability of Django to let you quickly create a site backed with
a powerful and easily-extended admin area.

That doesn't mean you can't find real people building real things
using PHP. I'm one of those people, and you can be too.

(PS -- I was totally brain-dead for not mentioning the awesome job
the folks at [OpenEvent](http://openevent.tv) did in livecasting
some of the talks at the event. I think there is a great need for
high-quality recording of talks at conferences and I wish them luck
going forwards convincing others that they should be an essential
part of any future conferences)


